aflatoxins are chemical poisons produced
by fungus in maize groundnuts and some
other staple crops due to their
widespread contamination in foods and
feeds there is high exposure to these
toxins in Africa often clean looking
grains also have aflatoxins aflatoxins
undermine human health are potent causes
of cancer suppress the immune system of
humans and animals and stunt children's
growth in addition they prevent farmers
from selling their products at premium
prices poultry and fish are highly
sensitive to alpha toxins as well they
die or their growth slows if feeds
contain alpha toxin there are more than
200 people died in Kenya due to
afterthoughts and poisoning however even
more dangerous
is it slow poisoning effect we are
exposed to the poison even before we are
born the toxin passes from mothers to
the unborn child and then from mothers
to the baby through breast milk then
from the weaning foods containing maize
and finally when we eat contaminated
maize based diet so all throughout this
whole process we are continually exposed
to the toxin in other words after toxin
is a silent killer
to address these problems a ITA and
partners developed Atlas safe a safe and
natural bio control product that
drastically cuts aflatoxin contamination
in African food crops collaborating with
the United States Department of
Agriculture ITA and partners
demonstrated the ability of a natural
fungus found in Nigeria to significantly
reduce concentrations of aflatoxins in
maize this technology is not new it is
being used in the US and we tested maybe
six loci materias before selecting so
calm compared to some other local
materials that we tested on station
trials in different locations in Nigeria
showed a tremendous drop in alpha toxin
contamination in maize farmers who
participated in the field trials of
after safe achieved on average high
levels of aflatoxin reduction on grains
at harvest this is
you can't even sit by yourself I've not
seen any disease on it compared with
before I mean in the cops you find out
that is this meat you know there are
some pops when you open them you find
out that they're kind of the native
strains of Aspergillus flavus that do
not produce aflatoxins called a
toxigenic strains are applied throughout
an area to box out and exclude alpha
toxin producers the Atok surger next
rains are carried on the grains from the
field to the stores this results in
reduced levels of aflatoxin
contamination in crops and in stores
there toxigenic strains survive in the
field for a long time providing benefits
for several years unlike pesticides this
biocontrol does not need repeated
applications the fungus that we apply
the toxin extremes that we apply can
survive for several years basically it
can help in improving health and the
benefit of that runs in millions of
dollars and in terms of benefit to trade
and to the pocket of farmers it runs
into tens of millions of dollars the
National Agency for Food and Drug
Administration in control nav DAC in
Nigeria has provisionally registered
after safe you see if it works
as the belief that you will I think it's
a welcome development even to the
government because in terms of safety
we've got many impressive technology
elisacorral a lot
our clocks are busy kosis its adoption
is expected to reduce aflatoxins in
grains and benefit the country through
improved health and incomes